


Lamont library right over there, one generation before us didn’t let women through its doors. But by the time we sat in your seats, everything was equal. Harvard and Radcliffe was fully integrated. We didn’t need feminism because we were already equals. We were wrong. I was wrong. The world was not equal then and it is not equal now.


I think nowadays we don’t just hide ourselves from the hard truths and shut our eyes to the inequities, but we suffer from the tyranny of low expectations. In the last election cycle in the United States, women won 20% of the Senate seats and all the headlines kept screaming out, “Women take over the Senate. Women take over the Senate.” I felt like screaming back, “Wait a minute, everyone. 50% of the population getting 20% of the seats, that’s not a takeover. That’s an embarrassment.”

Just a few months ago this year, a very well-respected and well-known business executive in Silicon Valley invited me to give a speech to his club on social media. I’d been to this club a few months before when I had been invited for a friend’s birthday. It was a beautiful building and I was wandering around looking at it, looking for the women’s room when a staff member informed me very firmly that the ladies room was over there. And I should be sure not to go upstairs because women are never allowed in this building.

I didn’t realize I was in an all-male club until that minute. I spent the rest of the night wondering what I was doing there, wondering what everyone else was doing there. Wondering if any of my friends in San Francisco would invite me to a party at a club that didn’t allow blacks or Jews or Asians or gays. Being invited to give a business speech at this club hit me as even more egregious because you couldn’t claim that it was only social. Business wasn’t done there.


My first thought was, “Really? Really?” A year after Lean In, this dude thought it was a good idea to invite me to give a speech to his literal all-boys club. And he wasn’t alone. There was an entire committee of well-respected businessmen who joined him in issuing this kind invitation. To paraphrase Groucho Marx and don’t worry, I won’t try to do the voice. “I don’t want to speak in any club that won’t have me as a member.” So I said no. And I did it in a way. I probably wouldn’t have even five years before.

I wrote a long and passionate email arguing that they should change their policies. They thanked me for my prompt response and wrote that perhaps things will eventually change. Our expectations are too low, eventually needs to become immediately. You need to see the truth and speak the truth. We tolerate discrimination and we pretend that opportunity is equal. Yes, we elected an African American president, but racism is pervasive still. Yes, there are women who run fortune 500 companies, 5% to be precise, but our road there is still paved with words like pushy and bossy. While our male peers are leaders and results-focused.


African American women have to prove that they’re not angry. Latinos risk being branded fiery hotheads. A group of Asian American women and men at Facebook wore pins one day that said, I may or may not be good at math. Yes, Harvard has a woman president and in two years, the United States may have a woman president. But in order to get there, Hillary Clinton is going to have to overcome two very real obstacles, unknown and often an understood gender bias and even worse, a degree from Yale.


You can challenge stereotypes, both subtle and obvious. At Facebook, we have posters around the wall to inspire us. Done is better than perfect. Fortune favors the bold. What would you do if you weren’t afraid? My new favorite, nothing at Facebook is someone else’s problem. I hope you feel that way about the problems you see in the world because they are not someone else’s problem. Gender inequality harms men along with women. Racism hurts whites along with minorities. And the lack of equal opportunity keeps all of us from fulfilling our true potential.


So as you graduate today, I want to put some pressure on you. I want to put some pressure on you to the hard truths, not shy away from them and when you see them to address them. The first time I spoke out about what it was like to be a woman in the workforce was less than five years ago. That means that for 18 years from where you sit to where I stand, my silence implied that everything was okay. You can do better than I did and I mean that so sincerely.


At the same time, I want to take some pressure off you. Sitting here today, you don’t have to know what career you want or how to get the career you might want. Leaning in does not mean your path will be straight or smooth. And most people who make great contributions start way later than Mark Zuckerberg. Find a jungle gym you want to play on and start climbing. Not only will you figure out what you want to do eventually, but once you do, you will crush it.


Looking at you all here today, I’m filled with hope. All of you were admitted to a small school near Boston, either for your academic potential, your personality or both. You’ve had your firsts, whether it’s a winter coat, a love or a C, you’ve learned more about who you are and who you want to be. And most importantly, you’ve experienced the power of community. You know that while you are extraordinary on your own, we are all stronger and can be louder together.


I know that you will never forget Harvard and Harvard will never forget you, especially during the next fundraising drive. Tomorrow, you all become part of a lifelong community, which offers truly great opportunity and therefore comes with real obligation. You can make the world fairer for everyone, expect honesty from yourself and each other, demand and create truly equal opportunity. Not eventually, but now. And tomorrow, by the way you get something Mark Zuckerberg does not have, a Harvard degree. Congratulations, everyone.
